.TH "LAM" "1" "April 2026" "Lambë 0.1.0" ""
.SH AUTHOR
Hakim Jonas Ghoula
.SH NAME
.PP
lam - query structured data files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
\fBlam\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIEXPRESSION\fR [\fIFILE\fR]
.PP
\fBlam\fR \fB-i\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIFILE\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Query JSON, YAML, TOML, HCL, XML, CSV, TSV, and Markdown files using a composable pipeline DSL. Format is auto-detected from file extension.
.PP
If no file is given, reads from standard input.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB-p\fR, \fB--pretty\fR
Pretty-print output. On by default.
.TP
\fB--no-pretty\fR
Disable pretty-printing.
.TP
\fB-r\fR, \fB--raw\fR
Output strings without quotes.
.TP
\fB-f\fR, \fB--format\fR \fIFMT\fR
Input format. One of: json, yaml, toml, hcl, xml, csv, tsv, markdown. Auto-detected from file extension if omitted.
.TP
\fB-t\fR, \fB--to\fR \fIFMT\fR
Output format. One of: json, yaml, toml, xml, csv, tsv, hcl. Default is json.
.TP
\fB--schema\fR
Show the data structure with type names instead of values.
.TP
\fB--assert\fR
Evaluate the expression and exit with code 0 if the result is true, 1 if false.
.TP
\fB-i\fR, \fB--interactive\fR
Start the interactive REPL. Requires a file argument.
.TP
\fB-h\fR, \fB--help\fR
Show usage information.
.SH QUERY LANGUAGE
.PP
Queries start with \fB.\fR (the current document) and chain operations with \fB|\fR.
.SS Field access
.PP
\fB.name\fR accesses a field. \fB.a.b.c\fR chains access. Missing fields return null.
.SS Indexing
.PP
\fB.[0]\fR indexes into a list. \fB.[-1]\fR indexes from the end. Out of bounds returns null.
.SS Slicing
.PP
\fB.[1:3]\fR extracts elements 1 and 2. \fB.[:3]\fR from the start. \fB.[2:]\fR to the end. \fB.[:-1]\fR all except the last.
.SS Arithmetic
.PP
+, -, *, /, % on numbers.
.SS Comparison
.PP
<, >, <=, >= on numbers. ==, != on any type.
.SS Boolean logic
.PP
&&, ||, ! with short-circuit evaluation.
.SS String interpolation
.PP
\fB"\\(.name) is \\(.age)"\fR evaluates expressions inside strings.
.SS Object construction
.PP
{name, total: .price * .qty} constructs a new object. {name} expands to {name: .name}.
.SS Conditionals
.PP
\fBif\fR \fIcond\fR \fBthen\fR \fIa\fR \fBelse\fR \fIb\fR
.SS Pipelines
.PP
\fB|\fR passes the left result into the right operation. Pipelines bind tighter than binary operators.
.SH PIPELINE OPERATIONS
.TP
\fBfilter\fR(\fIpred\fR)
Keep elements where \fIpred\fR is true.
.TP
\fBmap\fR(\fIexpr\fR)
Transform each element.
.TP
\fBsort\fR
Sort by natural order.
.TP
\fBsort_by\fR(\fIkey\fR)
Sort by a key expression.
.TP
\fBgroup_by\fR(\fIkey\fR)
Group into [{key, values}].
.TP
\fBunique\fR
Remove duplicates.
.TP
\fBunique_by\fR(\fIkey\fR)
Remove duplicates by key.
.TP
\fBflatten\fR
Flatten one level.
.TP
\fBreverse\fR
Reverse order.
.TP
\fBkeys\fR
Map keys or list indices.
.TP
\fBvalues\fR
Map values.
.TP
\fBlength\fR
Length of list, map, or string.
.TP
\fBfirst\fR, \fBlast\fR
First or last element.
.TP
\fBsum\fR, \fBavg\fR, \fBmin\fR, \fBmax\fR
Aggregate operations on numeric lists.
.TP
\fBhas\fR(\fIkey\fR)
Check if a map contains a key.
.TP
\fBto_entries\fR
Map to [{key, value}].
.TP
\fBfrom_entries\fR
[{key, value}] to map.
.TP
\fBfilter_values\fR(\fIpred\fR)
Filter a map's values.
.TP
\fBmap_values\fR(\fIexpr\fR)
Transform a map's values.
.TP
\fBfilter_keys\fR(\fIpred\fR)
Filter a map's keys.
.SH NULL PROPAGATION
.PP
Navigation on null returns null: \fB.missing\fR returns null, \fB.missing.nested\fR returns null.
.PP
Computation on null throws: \fBnull + 5\fR and \fBnull > 3\fR are errors.
.SH INTERACTIVE MODE
.PP
\fBlam -i\fR \fIfile\fR starts the REPL. Type queries at the \fBlambe>\fR prompt. REPL commands start with \fB:\fR to distinguish them from queries.
.TP
\fB:schema\fR
Show data structure.
.TP
\fB:to\fR \fIfmt\fR
Set output format.
.TP
\fB:raw\fR
Toggle unquoted string output.
.TP
\fB:pretty\fR
Toggle pretty-printing.
.TP
\fB:load\fR \fIfile\fR
Load a different data file.
.TP
\fB:history\fR
Show query history.
.TP
\fB:help\fR
Show available commands.
.TP
\fB:quit\fR, \fB:q\fR
Exit.
.PP
Tab completes field names and pipeline operations. Up/Down navigates history. Ctrl+R searches history.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
\fB0\fR
Success, or \fB--assert\fR passed.
.TP
\fB1\fR
Error, or \fB--assert\fR failed.
.SH FILES
.TP
\fB~/.lambe_history\fR
REPL command history, persisted between sessions.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Extract a value:
.PP
.nf
lam '.database.host' config.toml
.fi
.PP
Filter and project:
.PP
.nf
lam '.users | filter(.age > 30) | map(.name)' data.json
.fi
.PP
Aggregate:
.PP
.nf
lam '.items | map(.price) | sum' data.json
.fi
.PP
Format conversion:
.PP
.nf
lam --to yaml '.config' data.json
.fi
.PP
Schema inspection:
.PP
.nf
lam --schema deployment.yaml
.fi
.PP
CI validation:
.PP
.nf
lam --assert '.version != "0.0.0"' package.json
.fi
.PP
Pipe from stdin:
.PP
.nf
curl -s https://api.example.com/data | lam '.results | first'
.fi
.PP
Interactive exploration:
.PP
.nf
lam -i data.json
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
\fBjq\fR(1)
.PP
Project: https://github.com/hakimjonas/lambe
.PP
Documentation: https://pub.dev/packages/lambe
